---
title: "Sources of uncertainty: qualitative research"
date: 2023-02-27T17:25:32Z
draft: false
weight: 6
summary: "Sources analysis summary..."
---

Qualitative research projects are intended to explore and explain a sample of views, perspectives, behaviour, understanding and experiences of particular individuals or groups. The aim of qualitative research is to provide an in-depth understanding of a phenomenon rather than to establish its prevalence, probability or causality.

Qualitative research provides rich and deep insights into a specific phenomenon or experiences of a particular group within society, which wouldn’t otherwise be possible with quantitative research methods. Well-designed qualitative research will provide robust, insightful data to understand the big picture and go beyond anecdotal evidence.

There is inherent uncertainty and bias in all research and analysis methods, and qualitative research is no different. Qualitative researchers are trained to be mindful of the pitfalls of conducting and analysing qualitative data. They can account for, mitigate and minimise sources of uncertainty when designing and undertaking qualitative research to ensure it is robust, reliable and findings are presented and used appropriately. The following sections highlight some of the main sources of uncertainty at different stages of a qualitative research project.

### Sampling

Due to practical constraints it is not possible to include representatives of all the different sub-groups within the population in qualitative research. Instead priority is placed on depth rather than breadth of coverage - participants are included in the research on the basis that their views or experiences are worth exploring in-depth in their own right, and not because they are expected to be representative of a wider group or population. However, there is inherent uncertainty as the sample participants’ experiences might be radically different from others.

The research team is selective and uses their judgement when deciding who to include and exclude from the research sample. Quotas are set to ensure a sufficient number of research participants meet the key criteria or characteristics across the sample (e.g. balance of gender, age, location). As a result, individuals or groups with low prevalence in the population or who may be harder to reach could be excluded or under-represented in the sample. Where understanding the perspective of these groups is a priority for the research they may be purposely over-represented in the sample.

Purposive (selective) sampling in this way helps to ensure that opposing perspectives are taken into account in the study. Nonetheless, some respondents’ perspectives may not always be included in qualitative studies while some sub-groups’ views may be over-represented. This needs to be considered when drawing conclusions from the research especially when making generalisations about wider attitudes, experiences and behaviour.

### Recruitment methods

Identifying participants to engage in qualitative research can be time-consuming and costly, especially when looking to include hard to reach groups or ability to participate is limited by practical constraints such as the location and proposed timings for fieldwork. Steps are therefore often taken to minimise both and make the process as efficient as possible.

Researchers often rely on specialist recruitment agencies or pre-populated lists of potential respondents to identify suitable participants for the research study. The research team will typically produce a recruitment specification, specifying quotas and inclusion criteria for participants to take part. These typically aim for diversity in terms of demographic information, location, extent of experience/ engagement with a process etc. The aim is to achieve a range of perspectives within the time and budgetary constraints. However, there may be biases in terms of location or diversity, as recruitment agencies aim to meet the recruitment specification at least cost. This might mean, for example, that there may be demographic or locational biases in the sample, for example due to travel constraints or researchers’ working hours.

Furthermore, for convenience the recruitment agency might seek to recruit the participants from a pre-existing contact list in the first instance. Participants on those contact lists might differ in significant ways from those who are not – especially if the participants have been involved in previous research recently. These respondents might, for example, be fatigued from the research process, or otherwise simply be less interested or more engaged in the research process than the wider population. For this reason, researchers sometimes build conditions into the recruitment process to exclude those who have recently participated in any qualitative research.

If recruitment agencies are unsuccessful in recruiting from their existing contacts, they may turn to social media or other online sources to recruit participants. Whilst this may enable them to attract new people who haven’t participated in research before, the use of online recruitment methods means that they may again mean that certain groups are excluded from participation and there is an element of bias in the sample.

### The discursive nature of qualitative research

The conversational and interpretive nature of qualitative research can introduce uncertainty because there can be inconsistency in the way in which data is collected, shared and understood across the project. This includes data collected via discussion (e.g. interviews and focus groups) as well as that collected via observation and self-reporting techniques (e.g. diaries, journals, videos).

Qualitative research methods, such as interviews and focus groups, typically depend on interactive discussions between the researcher and the participant(s). This enables the researcher to probe and clarify the participants’ responses and pursue interesting lines of enquiry. This means that even when the researchers are using the same discussion guide, participants might reveal different insights to different researchers – depending on a variety of factors, such as the rapport they have established with the researcher and/or other participants, and the degree of probing from the researcher, and the environment in which the interview is taking place. So, if multiple researchers are involved in the data collection process or different methods are used in the same study (for example a mix of one-to-one interviews and focus groups) there may be differences in the data collected across the fieldwork.

Moreover, the time it takes to discuss a topic can vary, and this can mean some topics are not covered to the same extent in the time allocated across different interviews. This can result in inconsistencies in the format, coverage and content explored across the set of interviews, focus groups or supporting methods (e.g. journals, blogs) even when there is only one researcher involved in all. This tactic can be deployed on purpose to ensure the full range of topics are covered in sufficient depth across the fieldwork when it is not possible to discuss all in detail with each respondent or group of respondents. As such it does not undermine the quality or reliability of the research but must be accounted for when analysing and reporting the data.

By its nature, some qualitative research relies on what respondents report in interviews, focus groups and any written and audio-visual material they share as part of the process. Thus, an additional uncertainty arises in terms of reliability. Some respondents will be less willing to share information compared to others, while some may have difficulty recalling their views or experiences to answer the research team’s questions especially if a sensitive subject is being discussed. Similarly, the impact of social desirability bias - i.e. the tendency to answer questions in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others - can be strong in qualitative research settings where there is direct engagement between the researcher and respondent, and between respondents. Whilst these issues are not unique to qualitative research, they tend to be more prevalent when there is direct engagement between the researcher and the respondent.

To address this, researchers might choose to supplement or replace interviews or focus groups with observational methods - such as ethnography, usability research, accompanied activities or video recording. These techniques can help a researcher to achieve a more objective view and can be used to pick up insights that the respondent does not consider salient or interesting. However, there can be an element of bias and subjectivity in these methods too as they are dependent on what the researcher notices or hones in on and how they interpret the data which, in turn, can influence data collection and also analysis.

Ideally, qualitative researchers will stop collecting data when they have reached saturation. Saturation occurs when no new insights emerge that are unaccounted for by theory or by data. It is typically detected when the research team finds repetition of insights across respondents. However, saturation is not always achieved in practice, due to time and budget restraints, or a lack of respondent diversity. Instead it is common for the number and type of research participants to be specified at the outset of the study as part of the research design process. Failure to reach saturation means it is not possible to state that the findings are conclusive and no new themes, insights or perspectives are likely to emerge. As such there will be inherent uncertainty about conclusions inferred from the research which must be accounted for.

### The approach to data analysis

The approach to data analysis can influence what and how data is used. Qualitative research produces rich, detailed and often large volumes of data. Sometimes trade-offs need to be made when deciding how to analyse and use the data, that is, between presenting the full range of evidence on the one hand, and focussing on key themes and commonalities across the data. These decisions will also be influenced by the approach taken to the analysis. For example, thematic analysis will seek to draw out overarching themes in the analysis, whilst narrative analysis will focus more on how people make sense of their experience rather than the experience itself, and discourse analysis will hone in on the language used by research participants. The choice of analytic approach can therefore determine what and how data is used in analysis and reporting.

Sometimes researchers choose to synthesise or summarise the experiences of research participants with similar characteristics, behaviours or opinions to create typical or illustrative reference cases. They may also prioritise common or more prevalent themes or insights when reporting findings. In doing so, some of the nuance observed between respondents may be lost when findings are generalised.

Qualitative research is subject also to uncertainty due to differences in interpretation – the same information or quotation might be interpreted differently, for example, between the researcher and the respondent – especially if the respondents have substantial demographic differences from the researchers. Likewise, the research team may differ in how they interpret different participants’ responses. This can mean the same data is analysed differently by different researchers – they may identify different salient points, or group participants differently to answer the same research question.



